Thirty years of research has made carotenoid coloration a textbook example of an honest signal of individual quality, but tests of this idea are surprisingly inconsistent. Here, to investigate sources of this heterogeneity, we perform meta-analyses of published studies on the relationship between carotenoid-based feather coloration and measures of individual quality. To create color displays, animals use either carotenoids unchanged from dietary components or carotenoids that they biochemically convert before deposition. We hypothesize that converted carotenoids better reflect individual quality because of the physiological links between cellular function and carotenoid metabolism. We show that feather coloration is an honest signal of some, but not all, measures of quality. Where these relationships exist, we show that converted, but not dietary, carotenoid coloration drives the relationship. Our results have broad implications for understanding the evolutionary role of carotenoid coloration and the physiological mechanisms that maintain signal honesty of animal ornamental traits.


Red, yellow, and orange carotenoid-based color displays are among the most widespread and conspicuous ornamental traits in animals. Carotenoid coloration is frequently an important criterion in mate choice1, 2, and researchers have found associations between carotenoid coloration and various measures of individual quality in studies of fish, reptiles, and birds. On the basis of these observations, researchers hypothesized that assessment of the carotenoid coloration of prospective mates provides key information about individual quality and enables choices that increase fitness. However, the mechanism that links carotenoid coloration to individual quality, and hence the specific information content of carotenoid displays, remains unresolved and contentious.

In addition to being colorful, carotenoids are thought to be relevant and essential molecules used in cellular processes such as immunocompetence and vitamin A  synthesis, as well as antioxidants. Understanding the connections between individual quality and carotenoid ornamentation demands an understanding of the biochemistry of the pigments involved. Carotenoids cannot be synthesized by animals; whether they are used as external colorants or serve functions in cellular pathways, all carotenoids must ultimately be obtained from the diet. Moreover, animals typically ingest only the yellow carotenoid pigments. To display carotenoid-based red coloration, most animals have to bio-convert yellow pigments to red. The quality of an individual color display is a product of the biochemical pathways by which carotenoids are absorbed, transported, metabolized, and deposited, so it follows that these biochemical pathways are central in creating the connections between ornamental coloration and individual condition.

The dual role of carotenoids, both as colorants and potentially as important components of core cellular processes, is the foundation of the resource allocation trade-off hypothesis, which proposes that carotenoid coloration links to individual quality through tradeoffs in use of carotenoids for body maintenance versus ornamentation. Under this hypothesis, carotenoids are needed both for body maintenance and for ornamentation, and thus only individuals with large stores of carotenoids or with low demands for body maintenance due to superior health can afford to allocate sufficient carotenoids for production of full ornamentation. The resource allocation trade-off hypothesis does not predict a difference in the signal content of coloration derived from metabolically modified versus dietary pigments.


Alternatively, carotenoid coloration may serve as a reliable signal of individual quality because the mechanisms involved in the metabolic conversion of carotenoid pigments  are intimately linked to vital cellular pathways. This shared pathway hypothesis predicts that, regardless of the carotenoid resources that are available, disruption of core cellular processes, and particularly cellular respiration, will reduce production of carotenoid ornamentation. Moreover, under the shared pathway hypothesis, metabolism of dietary carotenoids for ornamentation should create stronger connections between cellular processes that give rise to quality and carotenoid-based signals because the pathways required for carotenoid metabolism are sensitive to the cellular environment. The process of transforming dietary carotenoids to ketocarotenoids  could be a key mechanism responsible for maintaining honesty from converted yellow and red carotenoid-based feather coloration, but this idea has not been rigorously tested.


Studies of the function and evolution of carotenoid coloration have frequently focused on birds and particularly on plumage. Sufficient studies have now been published to evaluate patterns among studies for associations between individual quality and feather coloration resulting from carotenoid pigments that emerge from fundamentally different biochemical processing. In this quantitative synthesis, we categorize carotenoids used for feather coloration as ‘dietary’ if the pigments are present in food and deposited in feathers without further modifications. Pigments in this category are absorbed, transported, and deposited but they undergo no metabolic conversion. The two most common dietary pigments used as colorants in birds are lutein and zeaxanthin. Alternatively, we categorize carotenoids as ‘converted’ if they are derived from dietary carotenoids that are metabolically oxidized internally by the bird to form ketocarotenoids before deposition to feathers . Common examples of converted carotenoids include echinenone, canthaxanthin, and canary xanthophylls.



Previous reviews of condition dependence of carotenoid pigmentation in birds have not considered whether the biochemical processes involved in carotenoid pigmentation—and specifically whether or not dietary carotenoids are metabolically converted—affects the relationship between coloration and quality. We hypothesized that the strength of the relationship between coloration signal and individual quality is dependent on whether the color display involved metabolic conversion of dietary carotenoids. We predicted that if the mechanisms of carotenoid metabolism are linked to basic cellular function that comprise individual quality, feather coloration requiring carotenoid metabolism would have a stronger positive relationship with measures of individual quality than feather coloration derived from deposition of unaltered dietary carotenoids. Additionally, metabolism of carotenoids requires the maintenance of enzyme systems and perhaps additional transport of carotenoids that may create stronger links between coloration and system performance for ornaments produced from converted pigments versus unaltered dietary pigments.

We tested our hypothesis that carotenoid metabolism strengthens the link between feather coloration and individual quality using meta-analysis. We quantitatively synthesized published results on the relationships between individual quality and plumage coloration of passerines produced via dietary versus converted carotenoids. Overall, we find that, without partitioning between carotenoid types, carotenoid-based feather coloration is positively associated with individual quality. However, including carotenoid type as a predictor reveals that converted, and not dietary, carotenoids are driving the relationship between coloration and quality. Thus, the physiological processes involved in carotenoid metabolism may be an important mediator in maintaining honesty from carotenoid-based coloration.
